Installation Process:

pytorch 0.3.0 does not exist as a wheel or install through standard virtual environment channels, such as conda or venv. Already had to install conda environment with v=3.6 to enable use of some of the code posted. May cause more issues later down the line. Failed to install other package equivlants from 2018 like spacey 2.0.18 and had to upgrade to slightly later versions.

#pytorch 0.4.1
#numpy=1.15.4 matplotlib=2.2.3 seaborn=0.8.1 cython=0.29
#spacy==2.1.8
#varies from original version

Architecture implementation

In the multihead attention function, I was confused by why 

self.linears = clones(nn.Linear(d_model, d_model), 4) 

was permissable seeing linear projection was happening for dimension d_k. It turns out, using this layer in tandem with [l(x).view(nbatches, -1, self.h, self.d_k).transpose(1, 2) for l, x in zip(self.linears, (query, key, value))] captures each individual projection for the queries, key, and values together in one larger matrix, matrix. In fact, X*W = Q and Q*W_d = projection for example, but ultimately X*W*W_d= projection, and W*W_d is just some learned weight parameter, so X*W' produces the projection just fine, which is what the line of code enforces.

self.lut = nn.Embedding(vocab, d_model)
-> is effectively a linear layer that maps to the embedding size specified from the vocab size but allows just an index to be passed representing the one hot vector of the vocab instead of having to pass an entire one hot vector into the layer. It is built to return an embedding vector based off the assumption it receives one hot vectors. But learned weights are equivalent to a linear layer

class PositionalEncoding(nn.Module):
    "Implement the PE function."
    def __init__(self, d_model, dropout, max_len=5000):
        super(PositionalEncoding, self).__init__()
        self.dropout = nn.Dropout(p=dropout)
        
        # Compute the positional encodings once in log space.
        pe = torch.zeros(max_len, d_model)
        position = torch.arange(0, max_len).unsqueeze(1)
        div_term = torch.exp(torch.arange(0, d_model, 2) *
                             -(math.log(10000.0) / d_model))
        pe[:, 0::2] = torch.sin(position * div_term)
        pe[:, 1::2] = torch.cos(position * div_term)
        pe = pe.unsqueeze(0)
        self.register_buffer('pe', pe)

Came to understand it sets up a unique sinusoid for each dimension and as position increases you move along that sinusoid. 

If the lowest-frequency sinusoid has a wavelength longer than the maximum context window, then positions do not alias (wrap phase), allowing absolute position to be uniquely encoded, while higher frequencies encode relative structure. The lower dimensions with high frequencies capture relative distance, or spread along a set window size shorter than the contxtw window, because the sinusoid will cycle after its period, meaning positions will share the same value for that given dimension over length. This captures multiple aspects of two word positions relative to each other. Position reshapes the embedding geometry in a structured way that preserves semantic structure while making position linearly recoverable.

Errors ran into due to torch 0.4.1 instead of 0.3.0 finally occurred with this encoding function also, as the position tensor as well as div term had to be converted to float for torch.exp to work since it's base type for arange is long.

Issue with random data generator code as it was originally, had to be redone.

Issue with original label smoothing which did not correctly guard for 0 dimension masks, had to change from dim to numel b/c dim still allowed 1 dimensional empty vectors

Issues with getting loss to work in pytorch 0.4.1 version which doesn't automatically convert long tensors in operations, so had to add .float to any line involving float in the SimpleLossCompute class

Got beam search working for initial random vector task. Learned how its search works by building k beams from each of the beams in the current beam set. It does so by taking each beam, decoding the next word probabilities for it, taking the top k and using the associated words to build k new beams. This totals up to k*k beams each iteration. At the end of each iteration, it culls these k*k beams into k beams once again. By looking ahead and attending to multiple sequences, it is more informed in its decision than greedy decoding which makes a more local decision each time.

Example of older CUDA working suboptimally with modern GPUs, seems old CUDA code could potentially work but run much slower: 
UserWarning: 
    Found GPU0 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3050 Ti Laptop GPU which requires CUDA_VERSION >= 9000 for
     optimal performance and fast startup time, but your PyTorch was compiled
     with CUDA_VERSION 8000. Please install the correct PyTorch binary
     using instructions from http://pytorch.org

Created BPE tokenizer, using traditional methods like adding </w> as eow to denote word boundaries and adding @@ at the end of subwords to properly detokenize later on. Pre-tokenization just required white space/punctuation splitting and adding the </w> boundary. These are the techniques of the original BPE tokenizer found here https://github.com/rsennrich/subword-nmt/blob/master/subword_nmt/apply_bpe.py, which is the github of Rico Sennrich, author of Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units. This would have been the version used by the original transformer paper. Adding _ was optional like the tutorial had was just another form of word boundary enforcement but from the start of a word, and seems to be an artifact of sentencePiece BPE as a form of denoting word boundary, but isn't necessary.

Attempting to split IWSLT dataset causes error as follows: ReadError: not a gzip file. Seems across Torch versions, dataset has either been defunct/moved or changed in its loading procedure. 
- Confirmed that old link grabbing IWSLT is now out of commision.
-https://wit3.fbk.eu/home was the home page and reference link huggingface used in their dataset library. It leads to a 404 error now. Tried to be clever and use modern python instead of datasets for python 3.6 but it uses the same link and thus cannot fetch anything
- cannot be found on wayback machine 
- found older dataset version without 2014 testsets that 2016 IWSLT compiled at 
- was found here http://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/fairseq/data/iwslt14/de-en.tgz on random github discussion thread about the link being dead
- new dataset still didn't work with torchtext split function b/c 2013 training split doesn't exist in old one obtained
- looked to download WMT-14 set instead, but torchtext cannot attain that one either 
- used modern python to download WMT14 splits and will attempt to substitute those instead, although this will make training much more expensive and tougher to get a demo model from to give me confidence b/c the dataset will be much larger. May try to manually shrink parts of WMT14 training split used instead to emulate small size of IWSLT for initial testing to gain confidence the training setup is working.
-have given up on iwslt16 dataset for now and will be pressing forward with WMT-14. Correctly have the original 4.5 million training corpus that the original transformer paper used. 
- proceeded to build BPE vocab based off WMT-14 into a size of 37000 tokens as original transformer paper did.

This problem taught me how torch datasets allows you to load data, it uses a reference link to the data at runtime that is provided by hugging face. I thought maybe the library itself hardstored the data, but that isn't the case always. Sometime's its an endpoint link fetch away.

In building BPE vocab, learned vocab is build via target-source joint training, meaning the source and targets languages receive the same vocab of the same size. Because english and german share base alphabets and certain words between them are shared, it's favourable for subword units to be learned mutually between them. I was under the impression, b/c of fundamental differences between the languages, separate vocabs would be learned for each (with separate sizes), but as the paper puts it, "Sentences were encoded using byte-pair encoding, which has a shared source-target vocabulary of about 37000 tokens". Curious if this is convenient or helpful for model geometry/dimensionality between encoder/decoder layers. This is only possible with language with a shared alphabet I'd presume but vocab size differences would be forced in languages that did not suit this, like English and Chinese.

Initial BPE training took 9 hours, much too inefficient, especially because I accidentally scheduled it for a vocab size of 32000 instead of 37000 (mixed up numbers given for en-fr and de-en vocabs from paper). Had to re-code it to make it efficient enough to complete within an hour. Runs fast for initial set of merge rules but VRAM/memory gets capped and starts running immensely slow. Should take around 42 minutes based on 6 minute rate for first 5000 merge rules (which have more associated words to sift through), but slows down to 3-4 hours as memory gets full (switches to hard drive memory that demands page switching instead of fast access memory on the same page and struggles to find open spots for new additions.) 

Will try on lab computer now (called pichu).

On lab computer, with improved BPE training code, it took 155 minutes or roughly 2.5 hours. Still not too fast but much better than before. Slowdown as merge count grew higher occurred once again, likely due to available VRAM for program filling up.

BPEtokenizer had words some words in the dictionary that are stored as A</w> while others are stored as A but when tokenizing, </w> is removed. So "kann</w>" in the vocab appears as "kann" and cannot be accessed. Fixed by stripping vocab of <\w> and <w\> on word index look up (necessaru for stoi call during one-hot encoding, as words aren't found otherwise). Had to do the same for @@ when its used in a lookup, b/c subwords possess @@ in tokenization but not in vocab.

CUDA 8.0 can't work with current GPUs, doesn't provide api to properly utilize memory and fails on batch sizes greater than 500. That or instructions of CUDA 8.0 can't transfer to newer gpus.

CPU device usage has issues as old pytorch doesn't automatically convert layers out of cuda for CPU, so it has to be manually done by setting iterator's device parameter (defaulted to 0) to -1 instead when working with the CPU. Otherwise, tensors will be of different types and device mismatch of old pytorch version will occur. Effectively, need to hard specify everything to use CPU device or computation graph for gradient will get messed up. This is being done to avoid the CUDA issue, will probably have to upgrade so gpu can be utilized.

Experiencing dimensionality issue with loss tensor calculation, which arose b/c of lack of computation graph possibly? It appears so, loss didn't grab computation graph as required grad returns false. This is because of the .data function originally accessed raw data from tensors in pytorch 0.3.0 but once raw data became almagamated with tensor objects in pytorch 0.4.1, .data came to serve as a way to detach data from the computation graph. So effectively, using .data wasn't forming the computation graph during tensor calculations.

Running on  CPU crashed lab computer at a batch size of 2000. Have to get CUDA working. Attempting to overhaul and re-run framework with torch=1.13 and cuda=11.7. Had to move all the way to torch 2.1 and cuda12.1 (with sm90 for 5070 Ti) and this required changing to python 3.8 from 3.6 

Still running to memory issues due to lines like torch.nonzero(A==B) which not only produces a boolean tensor of the same shape as target but generate a tensor of indices that leads to integer overflow issue that happens when numel exceeds 2^31-1. Fixed by getting rid of nonzero part and just keeping A==B so it' lazily computed.

Runs on lab computer no longer have bugs but are still taking too long (3 hours without a complete epoch). Lab computer does not have multiple GPUs and CPUs, so cannot take advantage of parallelization. Will have to move to HPC cluster through Canada Compute to obtain sufficient resources to complete training.

Obtained access to FIR server of Canada Compute. Attempted to use multi-gpu training from tutorial but it is outdated for modern hardware. Will have to replace it with DDP version from torch library and utilize torchrun for script which is built to segment and process fractions of dataset at once 

CUDA version upgraded for lab is insufficient for FIR. Have to upgrade to python 3.10 to use torch 2.1 with cuda 12.2. so H100s can function (which need sm120).

Canada Compute can only be used by queueing up for hardware allocation, which has significantly slowed development.

Original Iterator from tutorial code can't work with DDP implementation necessary for parallization of batch loading. Has to be changed into DataLoader object which comes straight from torch.utils.data and fits into framework of DDP library by working along with Distributed Sampler.

Currently running to OOM errors on FIR,attempts up to 141 GB. Possibly due to attempting to load too many tokens in training with available hardware. Old code doesn't cap how many tokens can be loaded into memory at once. Adding in a max_token cap in collate function which prepares batches for processing to prevent too many tokens being passed among processes. OOM issues seemed to have been resolved with this fix.

Ran into an issue during validation portion of training loop. For some reason, original tutorial code for SimpleLossCompute() does loss.backwards() even when gradient isn't meant to be propagated (it is outside the guard checking if opt is not None). Placing loss.backwards in the guard so computation graph is only modified when backwards propagation is intended during training portion of loop.

It was assuming earlier that OOM issues were caused by large batch size, but it may have been caused by incorrect tensor shapes. The original pipeline relied on time-major tensors (L, B) via transpositions inside rebatch. The new pipeline uses batch-first tensors (B, L) without transpoitoin. Changed all functions to expect (B, L) format and no longer use tranposition so old iterator logic isn't mixed with new Dataloader and passed larger tensors in batches than desired.

Training loop now works around expected date of March 22nd. FIRST CHECKPOINT FILES OBTAINED!!!

Desired to speed up training to get more hyperparameter combinations in so attempted to run multiple workers for DataLoader object so multiple cpus could assist in batch loading per process (each process slices up section of dataset to work with on a single gpu for training which is synchronized every epoch for the loss using the .barrier function, but these slices can also have multiple cpus assist to minimize latencencies in a single process.) In other words, current training works with multiple processes that each have a single gpu and cpu (processes spawned/nprocs per node) but each process can receive assistence from multiple cpus. For some reaosn, this did not work. Ran into:  RuntimeError: Cannot re-initialize CUDA in forked subprocess. Seems this is because forked processes inherit parent memory including CUDA contexts and CUDA does not allow re-initialization of GPU contexts in a forked child. Any .cuda() call in the worker triggers this error and thus any torchtext.Field or tensor touching GPU in workers will fail when num_workers

This is a problem because current code uses an older form of torchtext (per attempt to be faithful to tutorial code). However, torchtext object calls of SRC.numericalize([ex.src]) or TGT.numericalize([ex.trg]) triggers CUDA calls from torchtext objects by default. This forces DataLoader workers to touch GPU, triggering fork/CUDA conflict. Attempted to fix this by using torch.multiprocessing.set_start_method('spawn') avoids CUDA errors but this failed too. Elected to move on without it since training still completed without multiple cpu workers per process and major speedup came from using different processes already. Only 1.5 weeks left for project at this point.

Testing produced models finds improvements over epochs in terms of KL loss which is a healthy sign that training is working. Translations of "hello, how are you" for the best epoch at 1.9 KL loss is "Hall o , how are you going ? H ello , how are you going ? , how are you going ? ? ? ? H ello , how are you going ? ? ? ? ? ? H ello , how do you ? ? ? ? ?" which does carry sentence structure and a significant amount of correct semantics. A bit unclear why the sentence runs on and doesn't terminate. 

Found bug with orignal greedy decoder and current decoder. Doesn't terminate when it finds a EOS token. Adding this in, however, doesn't change translation. Checking over iterations with the decoder shows the EOS token probability never spikes, which indicates it isn't being learned. Have to look into this further.

Discovered a bug thr in custom collate function that prepares batches for training. Padding and sequence construction were incorrectly handled after removing MyIterator. Manual batching done in collate function bypassed Field.pad, so BOS/EOS tokens defined in TGT were never injected into target sequences. It was subtle because torch.nn.utils.rnn.pad_sequence() was used in in the collate function on received batches and was presumed to trigger pad functionality of torchtext objs SRC and TGT, but it didn't work with its api. As a result, training data contained no EOS tokens, despite the torchtext Fields TGT and SRC being configured with init_token, eos_token, and blank tokens. 

This would have caused the model to never observe proper sequence termination during training. Empirically, EOS probability remained near uniform during decoding, and generated sequences failed to terminate despite otherwise reasonable local translations.

Fix involved restoring the correct preprocessing pipeline by explicitly calling TGT.pad on token lists prior to numericalization within the collate function. This ensures BOS/EOS insertion and proper padding to batch max length. Subsequent numericalization produces fully consistent tensors with EOS present (has 2 at the end which is idx of EOS), enabling the model to learn termination behavior. It is not obvious that initilizing torchtext Field objects with the padding tokens and calling the pad function from torch.nn.utils.nnn wouldn't utilize it but it makes sense seeing that the torchtext library is separate and the one utilized is far out of date.

Something else to make note of is hyperparameters of 2000 warm up steps for optimizer and 12000 token batch size are artifacts of tutorial code appropriate for smaller dataset (IWSLT) but not for complete WMT14 dataset. Updating these hyperparameters to paper's selection of 4000 warm up steps and 25000 tokens had KL loss by epoch 10 of a fresh training loop improve by a significant amount (2.3 to 1.9 when per epoch improvement is roughly around 0.1 after epoch 6). This was before padding issue was fixed, so will carry these paper-faithful hyperparameter selections and hopefully receive close to paper accurate results because there isn't much time left for testing different hyper parameter selections.

Next step is to see how model performance changes with the padding fixed and in the meantime will attempt to get bleu score working to assess model performance.

Had to modify tokenizer and retrain b/c old one got rid of distinction between Hell-o and Hell for example (One is represented as Hell while the other is represented by Hell</w>). This was b/c of a misunderstanding on my part. The original transformer paper had the tokenizer tokenize with @@ for subwords that weren't representative of endings. However, my vocab wasn't built with @@ but instead the original <\w> of BPE tokenization, so I built a work around through SimpleVocab to adopt/emulate @@ tokenization for training by adding @@ to the end of every word that didn't possess <\w>. This became a problem though because subwords like Hell@@ didn't exist in my vocab. So to maintain functionality, during lookup of words like Hell@@, the @@ part is removed and Hell, which does exist, is recovered. This means though that Hell<\w> from the devil and Hell from Hello are equated, which is bad for training but also when recovering tokens from numericalization, only the index for Hell will be recovered, making sentence segmentation ambiguous. 

Example: "Hell is good" and "Hell o good" should become "Hell is good" and "Hello good", but without Hell</w> to separate them initially this difference is ambiguous. Not only is this bad for a final translation, but this ambiguity makes connecting the sentence for proper Bleu scoring impossible. Thus, this had to be removed and <\w> was elected to go for even if it's a less faithful approach to the original Transformer paper b/c there is no time to rebuild the vocab with @@ connections of subwords instead of <\w> to delimit the ends of words, although it may be the case the original paper used this too and only used @@ connections for detokinization purposes alone, meaning my approach remains faithful. Will see the result on the quality of translations from this. 

No sentence matching by length was done as the original transformer paper had to prevent excessive padding across batches (b/c every batch member is padded to the max length of its members necessary for the tensor calculation), so the load_parallel_corpus function had quantile sorting added to it. The tutorial code did not implement anything like this originally, just a filter to prevent sentences used in batches from exceeding some match token cap (MAX_LEN=100 utilized in filter_pred) but this is not the same exactly. Training will resume using this to hopefully reduce excess padding across batches and achieve improvement. 

Before, the collate_function applied a hard token cap to batches and would remove sentences from a batch if they would exceed that cap. This would systematically prune batches to prevent OOM issues experienced before. However, this removes potentially valuable examples, hurting training in the process. It is now believed OOM issues before were due to misshapen batch tensors which had not been transposed in (L,B) form instead of (B,L) which led to erroneous stacking of batches later on. This will be removed in an attempt to improve training. Batches will no longer be spliced down if they hold above the token limit, fitting more examples in. Another reason for the cap was to ensure at most 25000 tokens were accepted per optimization step but with the global average for token length per sequence being 30 in WMT14 training data, 208 sentences split across 4 processors averages around 25000 tokens per step like the original paper had. Batch sizes will be set to 175 to undercut this a little and account for the high variance among sentences but up to 200 will be experimented with also. This way, the replication will still adhere somewhat faithfully to the paper.


